my name is dr. Amit Basha I'm the chief
of cardiac surgery at New York
Presbyterian Columbia University Medical
Center and also the director of
pediatric cardiac surgery at New York
Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's
Hospital we cover the entire spectrum of
congenital heart disease so we do
neonatal cardiac surgery and we're going
to be talking about that but also
mechanical heart assist devices we do
heart transplants we do adult congenital
heart disease which is an emerging
population of patients so we cover
pretty much the entire gamut of
congenital heart disease and pediatric
cardiac surgery with outstanding results
the team the way that prepare for
neonatal and infant cardiac surgery is a
little bit different from preparation
for an older child a neonate by
definition is very fragile everything is
smaller that goes without saying but
also their reaction to certain
procedures is going to be different
they're going to be more susceptible to
edema to taking on taking on water
their heart beats faster for example the
reaction the reaction of the heart most
of the certain medication is different
in a neonate versus older kids so
because we know this and the science has
advanced quite a bit with respect to
neonatal physiology and cardiac
physiology the team prepares differently
in a sense that that that may give
different drugs they may the heart-lung
machine is miniaturized so that we don't
have to give a lot of volume to the baby
when we go on a heart-lung machine all
of these things occur routinely nowadays
but they are part of why neonatal care
surgery nowadays is really has become
extremely safe we like to really focus
on minimally invasive techniques a lot
because the impact on the child is very
positive long-term but also the trauma
because let's face it every surgery is a
trauma to the child's body so if we can
minimize that trauma it's a necessary
trauma because that's how we're
repairing a child's heart but if we can
minimize the impact on the patient's
body it's much better so we do it in
several ways number one the most obvious
one is we try to make small incisions we
don't make big incisions we try to
minimize the length of the incision that
has a cosmetic effect number one but
also it has if you don't have to make a
big opening into a patient's body
obviously the pain is less suffering is
less and a trauma is less that's the
first thing the way then the other
aspects of minimally invasive minimally
invasive characters are a little bit
more technical than than the incision
size and they have to do with how we use
the heart-lung machine what kind of
cannulas we use to hook up the patient
to the heart-lung machine all of these
things in aggregate make the impact and
the trauma of the surgery on a patient's
body much less hurtful if you will and
so we're able to do very complicated
repairs heart repairs and the child can
have the breathing tube out the next day
and can go home within a week and that's
something that 10 years ago would not
have been possible
I can't halluf in high light enough how
important it is to see care in a
multidisciplinary unit if you have a
child if you're pregnant with a child
with congenital heart disease and you
know the diagnosis from in from before
birth the reason that's important is
children sometimes the babies get in
trouble immediately after birth if they
have a concern a heart defect and of
course we can put the baby in an
ambulance and transport the baby to a
larger center tertiary center does all
these things of coronary center but it's
better to be in one place
on the one roof so in terms of advice to
the parents I would the most important
thing that they need to look at is how
experienced is the team taking care of
my baby so they don't you don't want to
go to a center that does 10 Union
correct surgeries a year or even 20 or
even 30 you want to go to a center those
hundreds of neonatal cardiac surgeries a
year literally every day every other day
operate on a newborn with congenital
heart defect because that is the only
thing that ensures quality of care we
see hundreds of babies with congenital
heart defects per year and our clinic
now of course they don't all require
surgery which is a good thing and if
there's any way we can avoid to operate
on them or do a less invasive therapy of
course we'll do that because we're
specializing because we are very focused
on neonates with Kotick disease or
outcomes have been really excellent I
would like to mention one more thing
which is very unique to this Center
which is we have specialized
neonatologists in cardiac disease and
that is something I worked in Chicago
and Boston before and this is really
unique to to here where the
neonatologists have taken it upon
themselves to specialize in cart disease
which has resulted in my opinions some
really very good management skills of
those babies our outcomes are
statistically superior than most centers
in the nation I'll say I say that in all
you know humbly but it's the truth we
have we participate in the sts
congenital heart surgery database which
is sort of the gold standard and so we
get every year we get a report on how
we're doing and we're doing extremely
well or I'll give you an example our
all-comers mortality for the first half
of 2012 is 0.9 percent that's for all
comers 0.9 percent that's an outstanding
number that it's our best yet and
hopefully we can stay at that level